---
title: My Personal Experiences with Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
layout: page
permalink: /dei/personal-experiences
nav_order: 2
parent: DEI
---

# My Personal Experiences with Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion

Often, you don’t think about who you are until suddenly, you're put in a situation where everything you thought you knew is shattered, making you question the most fundamental “truths” of your life. While trying to understand animal behavior, I have learned that every time you think you’ve figured something out, nature will always find a way to surprise you. However, over the last three years or so, I also learned that life will do the same. For a significant fraction of my life, I presented as a cisgender, heterosexual-passing man in the religious and racial majority, rarely having to think about my identity. But over the last few years, a lot has changed – from finishing a master’s thesis in a foreign country during a global pandemic to finally accepting that I was a woman born in a body that did not align with my assigned sex at birth. 

While I have been extremely privileged in my experience as a woman of color and a transgender person because of highly supportive friends, family, and academic mentors, I suddenly faced problems I would have never even recognized before. My transition affected aspects of life that I thought would be wholly independent and blind to my identity. I would often be stared at or talked over, even in purely academic contexts like conferences or workspaces. I finally realized the challenges one faces as a gender-nonconforming person or a woman in science– sometimes to be heard or taken seriously; and sometimes for our safety and comfort, physical and emotional. 

It was terrifying and overwhelming, and then the Covid 19 global pandemic hit. We were stuck alone in our homes in constant fear of our mortalities. It became increasingly hard for me to continue attending classes virtually. However, a few months into the pandemic, I saw how my friends and family rallied for me as I struggled with all the new changes. I felt the enormous privilege of having the support structure they created for me. That was when I decided to go from walking on eggshells to making a stand for my voice to be heard, to use the privilege I had to advocate for others. 

I had always been socially active at my institute, taking multiple leadership roles across the years as the head of different societies for festivals and science competitions. As a result, I had a decent amount of social capital, which I was determined to use to improve student's lives at my institute. Thus, I helped establish the Satrangi Queer Collective at IISER Pune.  With Satrangi and my academic mentors’ help, I became one of the first transgender students to be allocated gender-affirmative housing at any national science institute. I then used my precedent to help other national institutes establish queer collectives to advocate for better housing for transgender students. I also represented my institute at a coalition of queer societies in national institutes of India. 

Even as I focused on social activism for queer individuals in academia, I also decided to dedicate my time and computational skills to help manage the covid pandemic. Working with Dr. Giridara Gopal Parameshwaram from AIIMS Delhi, I developed detailed epidemiological models and a web-based surveillance platform for policymakers to understand the spread of COVID-19. We worked directly with policymakers to advise lockdown strategies. My actions helped me take charge of my own life and help others in the process.

As the conditions improved, I returned my focus to Neuroscience. I realized all my recent experiences, including moving to a new country, have changed the lens through which I look at the world but have not affected my scientific curiosity.  However, I now recognized my identity as a diasporic queer woman of color in science. Therefore, I would like to help with any diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives as a volunteer and help organize discussions to improve awareness about gender, race, class related inequities. I want to continue being an active advocate and work with other like-minded trainees to improve the lives of the people around me through open conversations and student-organized efforts while working on my scientific pursuits.
